# Global {#node-config-global}

# Example {#node-config-global-example}

```
stats = 1.0
affinity = 0x3
priority = 99
hugepages = 0
uuid = "ff1e2a1c-e0aa-11eb-b097-7c507989889d"
```

# Configuration

The global section consists of some global configuration parameters:

## stats (float) {#node-config-stats}

Specifies the rate at which statistics about the active paths will be periodically printed to the screen.

Setting this value to 5, will print 5 lines per second.

A line includes information such as:

  - Source and Destination of path
  - Messages received
  - Messages sent
  - Messages dropped

## affinity (integer) {#node-config-affinity}

Restricts the exeuction of the daemon to certain CPU cores.
This technique, also called 'pinning', improves the determinism of the server by isolating the daemon processes on exclusive cores.

## priority (integer) {#node-config-priority}

Adjusts the scheduling priority of the deamon processes.
By default, the daemon uses a real-time optimized FIFO scheduling algorithm.

## hugepages (integer) {#node-config-hugepages}

The number of hugepages which will be reservered by the system.

See: <https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/vm/hugetlbpage.txt>

A value of zero will disable the use of huge pages.

## uuid (string) = random generated {#node-config-uuid}

Each VILLASnode instance is identified by a globally unique indentifier / [UUID](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_Unique_Identifier).

This UUID can be queried by the [API](@ref node-dev-api).

If the setting is not provided, a UUID will be generated by hashing the active VILLASnode configuration.
This ensures that restarting the VILLASnode instance with the identical configuration will yield always the same UUID. 
